h1. PlayRythm version history

h2. <a name="roadmap">What's left for R1.0</a>

* There is no feature left for R1.0. RC6 will be the last RC version and if no show stopper found R1.0 will be released soon

h2. <a name="v1.0.0-RC6">v1.0.0-RC6</a>

* New built-in keywords:
** <a href="reference#expand"><code>@expand</code></a>: alias of <a href="reference#exec"><code>@exec</code></a>, used to expand a predefined <a href="reference#macro"><code>@macro</code></a>
* Enhancements:
** Support assign to final variable: <code>@assign("foo", true) {...}</code> and <code>@myTag(...).assign("myTagResult", true)</code>
* Bug fixes:
** "Cannot pass expression in parameters to @extends":https://github.com/greenlaw110/Rythm/issues/38
** "Cannot use complex expression in @set":https://github.com/greenlaw110/Rythm/issues/40
** "Need refresh twice when layout template changed":https://github.com/greenlaw110/Rythm/issues/42
** "expression with the same name as a keyword will not be evaluated":https://github.com/greenlaw110/Rythm/issues/43
** "In prod mode, javascript in templates can get corrupt over dropped newlines":https://github.com/greenlaw110/Rythm/issues/44
** "Support java syntax in tag parameters":https://github.com/greenlaw110/play-rythm/issues/16
** "@url expression cause trouble":https://github.com/greenlaw110/play-rythm/issues/24
** "String index out of range: -1":https://github.com/greenlaw110/play-rythm/issues/25
** "'Action Application.public not found' error when deploying to Heroku":https://github.com/greenlaw110/play-rythm/issues/28
** "In prod mode, javascript in templates can get corrupt over dropped newlines":https://github.com/greenlaw110/play-rythm/issues/29
** "i18n is always escaped":https://github.com/greenlaw110/play-rythm/issues/30

h2. <a name="v1.0.0-RC5">v1.0.0-RC5</a>

* New built-in keywords:
** <a href="reference#compact"><code>@compact</code></a>: mark a block of template to be output in compact mode without regarding to global engine setting
** <a href="reference#nocompact"><code>@nocompact</code></a>: mark a block of template to be output in NON-compact mode without regarding to global engine setting
** <a href="reference#macro"><code>@macro</code></a>: define an macro
** <a href="reference#exec"><code>@exec</code></a>: execute an macro
* Support "custom defined Java Extensions":user_guide#custom-java-extension
* Bug fixes:
** "enhance embedded template class fail":https://github.com/greenlaw110/play-rythm/issues/21
** "The content inside @for loop doesn't update on dev mode":https://github.com/greenlaw110/rythm/issues/35

h2. <a name="v1.0.0-RC4">v1.0.0-RC4</a>

* "Support groovy style null safe expression":user_guide#nullable_expression
* Support pre-compile - fast load on GAE or other cloud stack
* "Support template source properties enhancement":user_guide#properties_enhancement
* Bug fixes:
** "Template cache cannot handle nested class with levels 2 or more":https://github.com/greenlaw110/Rythm/issues/34
** "@invoke tag parse issue":https://github.com/greenlaw110/Rythm/issues/32
** "Cannot compile template when reference to application class in WAR deployment":https://github.com/greenlaw110/play-rythm/issues/20

h2. <a name="v1.0-RC3">v1.0.0-RC3</a>

* Bug fixes:
** "cannot do type cast in @for loop":https://github.com/greenlaw110/Rythm/issues/29
** "escape with JSON format cause syntax error in javascript":https://github.com/greenlaw110/Rythm/issues/27
** "@__simple__ template java source does not have setRenderArgs(Object...) method":https://github.com/greenlaw110/Rythm/issues/24
** "Cannot use primitive type in @for loop":https://github.com/greenlaw110/Rythm/issues/30
** "@args: Cannot declare array type":https://github.com/greenlaw110/Rythm/issues/33
** "Logic error is RythmPlugin.isActionCall":https://github.com/greenlaw110/play-rythm/issues/19
** "Fix login form for Secure":https://github.com/greenlaw110/play-rythm/pull/18 - thanks to "Roman Dolgushin":https://github.com/rdolgushin for the contribution
** "NPE when doing reverse url lookup in mail template":https://github.com/greenlaw110/play-rythm/pull/11 - thanks to "Sojin":https://github.com/sojin for the contribution

h2. <a name="v1.0-RC2">v1.0.0-RC2</a>

* Support "GAE mode":integration#configuration
* A live "demo application":http://play-rythm-demo.appspot.com/ running on GAE for study
* Issues resolved:
** "Support TagContext in FastTags":https://github.com/greenlaw110/play-rythm/issues/13
** "Support FastTags default arg":https://github.com/greenlaw110/play-rythm/issues/14

h2. <a name="v1.0-RC1">v1.0.0-RC1</a>

h3. break changes

* <a href="reference#renderBody"><code>@renderBody()</code></a> does not render layout content now. It's used to "render tag body":user_guide#callback_tag_body specifically. To render the layout content, use <a href="reference#render"><code>@doLayout()</code></a> or <a href="reference#render"><code>@render()</code></a> without section name parameter
* Automatic escape expression with html format if the template file name suffix is .html. If your code breaks, try to use <a href="reference#raw"><code>@raw()</code></a> tag to surround relevant template part or export your variable with <code>.raw()</code> extension.
** Note **auto-escape can cause template execution performance up to 3 times slower** (still much faster than groovy) depending on how many expressions there are in your template, but we consider it a good trade-off to offer a secure default behavior. For those people who "need for speed", simply wrap your entire template content in @raw@ block: <code>@raw(){your content comes here}</code>.
* @app/view@ as template root are no longer supported. All rythm template files must be put into @app/rythm@ folder
* @app/view/tags/rythm@ as tag root are no longer supported. Just put tag files as normal template file into @app/rythm@ folder
* <a href="reference#section"><code>@section</code></a> tag usage:
** previously <code>@section sectionName {...}</code>
** now <code>@section("sectionName") {...}</code>

h3. New features

* "Tag invocation decorations":user_guide#tag_invoke_decoration and "chain":user_guide#chain_tag_invocation_decoration them together
** "Cache tag invocation result":user_guide#tag_invocation_cache
** "Cache controller action invocation result":user_guide#invoke_action_cache
** "Invoke tag/action call using relative path and import path":user_guide#call_tag_relative_path
** "Specify body callback parameter spec":user_guide#tag_invocation_callback
* "Template content decorations":user_guide#template_content_decoration and "chain":reference#chain them together
** "Mark a template block to output raw expression":reference#raw
** "Mark a template block to escape expression using specific type":reference#escape
** "assign a block of template content into a variable":reference#assign
** "cache a template block":reference#cache
* "Dynamic tag invocation with @invoke keyword":user_guide#dynamic_tag_invocation
* "Call tag body with parameter":reference#renderBody_with_params
* "Include other template inline":user_guide#include. And now you can "reuse inline tag definitions across multiple views":user_guide#reuse_inline_tag
* Call the current template (self) as a tag using <a href="reference#this"><code>@this</code></a> directive
* <a href="reference#extends"><code>@extends()</code></a> directive now has "new syntax":user_guide#extended_template_path to specify layout(parent) template
* <a href="reference#return">Abort current template executing process and return to caller using <code>@return</code></a>
* <a href="reference#break">Break the current loop using <code>@break</code></a>
* <a href="reference#continue">Continue the current loop using <code>@continue</code></a>
* New <a href="integration#cache4">@Cache4@</a> annotation to mark on controller action method
* <code>@ts()</code> output timestamp in place
* <code>@__simple__</code> mark the current template as simple template with no implicit variables/imports and does not extend other template
* An new demo application with 25 sample cases, with each one has template source and generated java source presented for quick study the Rythm engine

h3. Small enhancements

* <code>@verbatim(){}</code> now escape html code
* <code>@render[Section]()</code> now accept <a href="reference#default_section_content">default content/section block</a>
* <a href="reference#for_second_form">Support <code>@for(int i = 0; i < 100; ++i)</code> loop style</a>
* New alias for Play specific keywords:
** <code>@url</code>: previously <code>@_u</code>, url reverse lookup
** <code>@fullUrl</code>: previously <code>@_au</code>, url reverse lookup with absolute path
** <code>@msg</code>: previously <code>@_m</code>, i18n message lookup

h3. Issues closed

* "https://github.com/greenlaw110/Rythm/issues/6":https://github.com/greenlaw110/Rythm/issues/6
* "https://github.com/greenlaw110/Rythm/issues/21":https://github.com/greenlaw110/Rythm/issues/21
* "https://github.com/greenlaw110/Rythm/issues/14":https://github.com/greenlaw110/Rythm/issues/14
* "https://github.com/greenlaw110/play-rythm/issues/5":https://github.com/greenlaw110/play-rythm/issues/5
* "https://github.com/greenlaw110/play-rythm/issues/1":https://github.com/greenlaw110/play-rythm/issues/1
* "https://github.com/greenlaw110/play-rythm/pull/11":https://github.com/greenlaw110/play-rythm/pull/11

h2. <a name="v0.9.7a">v0.9.7a</a>

* Add two implicit variables: @_rythmPlugin@: the RythmPlugin instance; @_rythm@ the RythmEngine instance
* Add @RythmPlugin.isActionCall()@ api to allow template author to know whether it is inside a action invocation context

h2. <a name="v0.9.7">v0.9.7</a>

* Support invoke controller action method in template

h2. <a name="v0.9.6c">v0.9.6c</a>

* Fix bug: Secure layout not found when loading the module directly in project folder instead of installing to play/modules

h2. <a name="v0.9.6b">v0.9.6b</a>

* Fix bug: Java FastTags stop working on v0.96.

h2. <a name="v0.9.6a">v0.9.6a</a>

* Emergency fix to ArgsParser: line breaks stay there which makes the generated html not valid as you have line breaks before <!DOCTYPE html>

h2. <a name="v0.9.6">v0.9.6</a>

* Error report update to play-2.0 style
* Solve several issues in built-in tag/templates
* Precompile now build all rythm templates (So move templates to app/rythm folder)
* <code>@UseRythmTemplateEngine</code> and <code>@UseSystemTemplateEngine</code> annotation are deprecated now
* add <code>@__exitIfNoClass__</code> directive to allow exit parsing process if no certain class exists
* bug fix: "https://github.com/greenlaw110/Rythm/issues/15":https://github.com/greenlaw110/Rythm/issues/15
* print out java source if compilation error on prod mode
* bug fix: NPE while scan tags in rare cases
* simplified class reloading logic in <code>TemplateClassLoader.detectChange(...)</code>
* improved template line number report in error reporting
* buf fix: "https://github.com/greenlaw110/Rythm/issues/1":https://github.com/greenlaw110/Rythm/issues/1
* support <code>{}</code> to enclose tag body
* support <code>@{}</code> to enclose script content.
* improved space/line break compact handling, now "//" line will not get merged with the following line
* improved debugging when error happened in the embedded class

h2. <a name="v0.9.5b">v0.9.5b</a>

* Bug fixes
** "https://github.com/greenlaw110/Rythm/issues/15":https://github.com/greenlaw110/Rythm/issues/15
** "https://github.com/greenlaw110/Rythm/issues/13":https://github.com/greenlaw110/Rythm/issues/13
** "https://github.com/greenlaw110/play-rythm/issues/4":https://github.com/greenlaw110/play-rythm/issues/4
* Add @__exitIfNoClass__ instruction to enable exit from parsing process if no class found

h2. <a name="v0.9.5a">v0.9.5a</a>

* Support app/rythm as view root
* Fix NPE when running in prod mode in rare cases
* template class cache hash calculation take plugin version into consideration
* Now you can call self tag inside that tag

h2. <a name="v0.9">v0.9</a>

* The first public beta release
