h1. PlayRythm Reference

h2. <a name="tags">Built-in Tags</a>

h3. <a name="msg">msg</a>

PlayRythm specific tag. Lookup message string.

bc. @msg("validation.required")

The above has the same effect of the following groovy template code:

bc. &('validation.required')

You can also pass parameters:

bc. @msg("some.message", "param1")

h3. <a name="url">url</a>

PlayRythm specific tag. Reverse lookup URL.

bc. @url(Application.index)

The above code is equal to the following groovy template code:

bc. @{Applicaiton.index}

You can also reverse lookup static url

bc. @url(/public/javascripts/myscript.js)

h3. <a name="fullUrl">fullUrl</a>

PlayRythm specific tag. Absolute reverse lookup URL.

bc. @fullUrl(Applicaiton.index)

The above code is equal to the following groovy template code:

bc. @@{Application.index}

h3. <a name="assign">assign</a>

Assign the enclosed block into a variable.

bc. @assign("roleSelector") {
<select>
@for(Role role: Role.findAll()){
<option value="@role.getId()">role.toString()</option>
}
</select>
}
...
<label>select role</label>
@roleSelector.raw()

p(note). The variable name specified in <code>@assign</code> must be unique across the context where <code>@assign</code> is put in. Otherwise you will expect a compilation exception

h3. <a name="args">args</a>

The @args@ tag declare variables used in the template.

bc. @args String var1, int var2, ...;

p(note). @args@ is one of few tags that are not invoked in @tag(...) style. At the moment please use ";" to terminate @args@ statement. This limitation will be removed in the future, and line-break could be an natural way to terminate the statement

You can have any arbitrary number of @args@ statement in any where of your template, all variables declared will be effective in your template.

h3. <a name="authenticityToken">authenticityToken</a>

PlayRythm specific tag. This is a clone of the "authenticityToken":http://www.playframework.org/documentation/1.2.4/tags#authenticityToken tag in Play's groovy template.

bc. @authenticityToken()

Rendered as:

bc. <input type="hidden" name="authenticityToken"
    value="1c6d92fed96200347f06b7c5e1a3a28fa258ef7c">

h3. <a name="authenticityTokenValue">authenticityTokenValue</a>

PlayRythm specific tag. Use @authenticityTokenValue@ when you want to put the authenticity token value inside a javascript code in your view:

bc. $.post("@url(User.save())",
    {authenticityToken: '@authenticityTokenValue()', ...},
    function(data){...});

Rendered as:

bc. $.post("/user/save",
    {authenticityToken: "1c6d92fed96200347f06b7c5e1a3a28fa258ef7c", ...},
    function(data){...});

h3. <a name="break">break</a>

Break <code>@for</code> loop

bc. @for(User user: users) {
	@if(theUserId.equals(user.getId())) {
		@break
	}
}

h3. <a name="cache">cache</a>

Caches the tag body or use cached tag body

bc. @cache("5min") {
    <p>This content will be cached for 5 minutes</p>
    including calling to any tags like:
    @myTag()
}

Parameters:

* empty parameter: the enclosed content get cached for duration defined in "rythm.cache.defaultTTL" seconds.By default it's one hour
* first parameter: optional. specify the cache duration. Examples:
** "5min", five minutes
** "1h": one hour
** "10s": ten seconds
** "360d": three hundred and sixty days
** 60 * 60: one hour
* rest parameters: optional. specify the parameters impact the cache key. By default cache key is calculated literally using the enclosed content. However if rest parameters presented the cached key will be calculated using the parameters as well. For example

bc. @cache(null, new Random().nextInt()) {
    <p>[@(new Date().getTime())]this content will literally looks like not cached at all because the cache argument changes every time</p>
}

p(note). Be cautious when you use <code>@cache()</code> with template blocks contains <code>@include()</code>. Cache key is calculated at parsing time, while <code>@include()</code> content is appended to template at code generating time when cache key calculating already done. Thus Rythm cannot differentiate the differences among included content. The rule of thumb is: **if include content varies dynamically, do not cache it**

-h3. <a name="cacheOnProd">cacheOnProd<a>-

-Same as "cache":#cache, but cache happens only when @play.Play.mode@ is "@prod@".-

p(note). @cacheOnProd@ is no longer available in v1.0. Use @cache instead. However
you can configure rythm not to cache on dev mode by using "rythm.cache.prodOnly" setting.
By default "rythm.cache.prodOnly" is set to @true@

h3. <a name="callback">callback</a>

@callback@ is a unique tag in that it cannot used independently. It can only be attached to a tag invocation to mark the tag body argument list:

bc. @tagX().callback(String name) {
    hello @name
}

And inside @tagX@ you have

bc. renderBody(name: "Motorola")

or by position

bc. renderBody("Motorola")

h3. <a name="chain">chain</a>

Chain the following decoration functions together:

# "cache":#cache
# "escape":#escape
# "raw":#raw
# "callback":#callback
# "assign":#assign

In the example of "assign":#assign, you found that it always needs to call <a href="#raw">@raw()@</a> when you want to use the variable get assigned, by using @chain@ you can do it at one time:

bc. @chain.raw().assign("roleSelector") {
<select>
@for(Role role: Role.findAll()){
<option value="@role.getId()">role.toString()</option>
}
</select>
}
...
<label>select role</label>
@roleSelector @// no longer need raw() extension any more

And you even add @cache()@ into the chain:

bc. @chain.raw().assign("roleSelector").cache() {
...
}

The order of the chained function doesn't matter as they are orthogonal concerns.

h3. <a name="continue">continue</a>

Continue current loop:

bc. @for (User user: users) {
    @if (user.isAdmin()) {
        @continue
    }
    ...
}

h3. <a name="doLayout">doLayout</a>

Used with template inheritance, this tag inserts the evaluated sub-template’s contents.

bc. <!-- common header here -->
<div id="content">
    @doLayout()
</div>
<!-- common footer here -->

@doLayout@ tag is an alias of "render":#renderSection tag

p(note). An easier and clean way to <code>@doLayout()</code> is <code>@render()</code>

See also "template inheritance":user_guide#inheritance

h3. <a name="error">error</a>

PlayRythm specific tag. Outputs the validation error message, if present, for the field specified by the tag parameter.

bc. @error("user.name")

You can use the optional parameter to use a different field’s error message. This is useful when you want several fields to share a common error message.

bc. @error("contact.street", "contact.address")
@error("contact.city", "contact.address")
@error("contact.country", "contact.address")

h3. <a name="errorClass">errorClass</a>

PlayRythm specific tag. Outputs the text @hasError@ if there is a validation error for the field specified by the tag parameter. This is useful for setting a CSS class for input fields with errors:

bc. <input name="name" class="@errorClass("name")">

which is equivalent to:

bc. <input name="name" class="@(play.data.validation.Validation.hasError("name") ? "hasError" : '')">

h3. <a name="errorList">errorList</a>

Corresponding to Groovy template's "errors":http://www.playframework.org/documentation/1.2.4/tags#errors. Iterates over the current validation errors.

bc. <ul>
@errors() {
    <li>@error</li>
}

The tag defines implicit variables in its body.

* @error@, the error
* @error_index@, the error’s index, starting at 1
* @error_isLast@, true for the last element
* @error_isFirst@, true for the first element
* @error_parity@, alternates between @odd@ and @even@

bc. <table>
<tr><th>#</th><th>Error</th></tr>
@errorList() {
    <tr class="@error_parity"><td>@error_index</td><td>@error</td></tr>
}
</table>

You can also use the optional field parameter, or just the default parameter, to filter only the errors belonging to a certain field.

bc. <ul>
@errorList("myField") {
    There where errors with the field myField<br />
    <li>@error</li>
}
</ul>

h3. <a name="escape">escape</a>

Mark a block of template code default escape scheme:

bc. @escape("JS"){
alert("Hello Rythm");
}

The above code set the default escape to @JavaScript@. The parameter passed to @escape() could be one of the following:

# RAW - do not escape. Same effect with <a href="#raw"><code>@raw()</code></a>
# CSV - escape as csv format
# HTML - escape as html format
# JS | JavaScript - escape as JavaScript format
# JAVA - escape as Java format
# XML - escape as XML format

Note

* the parameter is case insensitive.
* if no parameter is passed, then it default to HTML
* you pass the parameter within quotation mark or not

h3. <a name="extends">extends</a>

Makes the template inherit another template.

bc. @extends(main)

or

bc. @extends("main")

You can pass parameter to extended template if the there are arguments declared.

Suppose you have a parent template defined as:

bc. @args String style;
<div class="panel @style">
    @renderBody()
</div>

And in your extending template, you pass the argument style as:

bc. @extends(panel, style: "span4")

or pass by position:

bc. @extends(panel, "span4")

h3. <a name="debug">debug<a>

You can use @debug@ tag to output debug message to your log file or screen:

bc. @debug("this is a debug message for %s", myvar)

h3. <a name="for">for</a>

Use @for@ to iterate a collection of objects. The syntax is the same as for loop in Java language:

bc. <ul>
@for (Product product: products) {
    <li>@product</li>
}

The tag defines implicit variables in it's body. The variable names are prefixed with loop variable name:

* @name_index@, the item's index, start with 1
* @name_isFirst@, true for the first element
* @name_isLast@, true for the last element
* @name_parity@, alternates between @odd@ and @even@
* @name__isOdd@, true if the current element is odd in sequence
* @name_size@, the size of the collection

bc. <ul>
@for (Product product: products) {
    <li class="@product_parity">@product_index. @product</li>
    @(product_isLast ? "" : "-")
}
</ul>

<a name="for_second_form">You can also use the second form of <code>@for</code> tag:</a>

bc. @for(int i = 0; i < 6; ++i) {
    <li>the current index is @i</li>
}

h3. <a name="get">get</a>

Retrieves value defined with a "set":#set tag. You may use the get/set mechanism to exchange values between templates, layouts and sub-templates.

bc. <head>
    <title>@get("title")</title>
</head>

You can provide a default value in the following way, which will display "Homepage", if title has not been specified:

bc. <head>
    <title>@get("title": "Homepage")</title>
</head>

h3. <a name="if">if-elseif</a>

Evaluates a given test, and if true, evaluate the tag body. The syntax is the same as @if@ clause in Java language

bc. @if ("en".equals(user.countryCode)) {
    Connect user is @user
}

You can also use @else@ clause:

bc. @if (null != user) {
    Connected user is @user
} else {
    Please log in
}

or @else if@ clause

bc. @if (tasks.size() > 1) {
    Busy tasklist
} else if (tasks.size() > 0) {
    One task in the list
} else {
    Nothing to do
}

h3. <a name="include">include</a>

Do an inline @include@ a template into the current template:

bc. @include("common.utils")

See "Include other templates":user_guide#include section for details

h3. <a name="invoke">invoke</a>

Enable dynamic tag invocation:

bc. @invoke("designer." + platform).ignoreNonExistsTag()

See "Dynamic tag invocation":user_guide#dynamic_tag_invocation section for details

h3. <a name="renderBody">renderBody</a>

AKA @doBody@, @renderBody@ -is an alias of "doLayout":#doLayout.- is used to render the tag body.

bc. @renderBody()

<a name="renderBody_with_params">If tag body is supplied along with <a href="#callback">@callback@</a> extension, then you can pass parameters into @renderBody@ call:</a>

bc. @renderBody(user.role)

or by name:

bc. @renderBody(role: user.role)

h3. <a name="render">render</a>

AKA @renderSection@ and @doLayout@, used with template inheritance, this tag inserts the evaluated sub-template’s contents defined with <a href="#section">@section@</a> tag

bc. <div id="sidebar">
    @render("sidebar")
</div>

When no section name specified this tag output the layout content:

bc. @render() @// same effect as groovy's #{doLayout/}

<a name="default_section_content"></a>

Start from v0.9.8 Rythm support define default content for section:

bc. <div id="footer">
    @renderSection("footer") {
        @// here we define default content for footer section
        @// if sub template failed to supply this section then
        @// the default content will be output instead
        <p>Site footer - &copy; Santa Clause</p>
    }
</div>

h3. <a name="return">return</a>

Abort the template execution and return to caller:

bc. @if(!user.isAdmin()) {
	@return
}
<p class="admin-panel">...

h3. <a name="section">section</a>

Define a block of template to be output in parent template's named section.

bc. @section("sidebar") {
    <ul>
        <li><a href="#">Link one</li>
        <li><a href="#">Link two</li>
    </ul>
}

h3. <a name="set">set</a>

Define a value which can be retrieved in the same template or any layout with the "get":#get tag.

bc. @set(title: "Admin")
@set(style: "span6")

You can use any expression in @set@ tag

bc. @set(title:"Profile of " + user.login)

Unlike "set"#http://www.playframework.org/documentation/1.2.4/tags#set tag in Groovy template engine, Rythm @set@ tag does not accept tag body. You can use "section":#section tag to achieve the same result.

h3. <a name="tag">tag</a>

Define an inline tag used in the same template, parent template or child template.

bc. @tag sayHi(String who) {
    Hi @who
}

To use the tag defined just follow the common way:

bc. @sayHi("Play!framework")

or pass argument by name:

bc. @sayHi(who: "Play!framework")

p(note). <code>@tag</code> is not used to invoke a tag. Check the "user guide":user_guide#invoke_tag to see how to invoke a tag.

h3. <a name="raw">raw</a>

Mark a block of template code that by default output raw data for expression:

bc. @{
String body = "<p>some news</p";
}
@raw() {
@body
}

The above code basically equals to

bc. @{
String body = "<p>some news</p>";
}
@body.raw()

h3. <a name="ts">ts</a>

Output timestamp in place

bc. now is @ts()

h3. <a name="verbatim">verbatim</a>

Define a block of code that not to be parsed by Rythm.

bc. @verbatim() {
    OK, anything inside this block is not parsed: @someTag, @someExpression, etc
}

h3. <a name="__simple__">__simple__</a>

Mark the current template as a **simple** template. A simple template does not contain implicit arguments and is slightly faster than normal template

h2. PlayRythm Configuration

PlayRythm provides all default configuration settings that cater for most common use cases.

|_. configuration |_. description |_. default value|
|@rythm.mode@|set rythm template engine to run in dev or prod mode|the value of play.mode|
|@rythm.compactOutput@|remove redundant space and line breaks|true in prod mode and false in dev mode|
|@rythm.enableJavaExtensions@|enable "Java extension parsing":user_guide#java_extension|true|
|@rythm.default.engine@|Indicate which template should be used as default|system (i.e. groovy)|

h2. <a name="resource">See Also</a>

# "Integrate PlayRythm into your Play project":integration
# "Rythm Template User guide":user_guide